docs: rewrite SAML SSO guide and split into dedicated sub-pages (#7484)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/users-roles/cluster-or-deployment-auth/saml-without-kibana.md

---
navigation_title: SAML without Kibana
description: Implement SAML authentication for a custom web application using the Elasticsearch SAML REST APIs, without Kibana.
applies_to:
  stack: all
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# SAML without {{kib}} [saml-no-kibana]

> The SAML realm in {{es}} is designed to allow users to authenticate to {{kib}} and as such, most of the [SAML SSO guide](/deploy-manage/users-roles/cluster-or-deployment-auth/saml.md) makes the assumption that {{kib}} is used. This page describes how a custom web application could use the relevant SAML REST APIs in order to authenticate users to {{es}} with SAML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SAML realm in {{es}} is designed to allow users to authenticate to {{kib}} and as such, most of the [SAML SSO guide](/deploy-manage/users-roles/cluster-or-deployment-auth/saml.md) makes the assumption that {{kib}} is used. This page describes how a custom web application can use SAML REST APIs in order to authenticate users to {{es}} with SAML.
```

::::{note}
This page assumes that you are familiar with the SAML 2.0 standard and more specifically with the SAML 2.0 Web Browser Single Sign On profile.
::::

Single sign-on realms such as OpenID Connect and SAML use the Token Service in {{es}} and in principle exchange a SAML or OpenID Connect Authentication response for an {{es}} access token and a refresh token. The access token is used as credentials for subsequent calls to {{es}}. The refresh token enables the user to get new {{es}} access tokens after the current one expires.

> ## SAML realm [saml-no-kibana-realm]

Reviewer: should these be numbered steps? 

1. Create a SAML realm in {{es}}
2. Create a service account user

Author: https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1587

You must create a SAML realm and configure it accordingly in {{es}}. See [Create a SAML realm](/deploy-manage/users-roles/cluster-or-deployment-auth/saml.md#saml-create-realm).

## Service account user for accessing the APIs [saml-no-kibana-user]

> The realm is designed with the assumption that there needs to be a privileged entity acting as an authentication proxy. In this case, the custom web application is the authentication proxy handling the authentication of end users (more correctly, "delegating" the authentication to the SAML Identity Provider). The SAML related APIs require authentication and the necessary authorization level for the authenticated user. For this reason, you must create a Service Account user and assign it a role that gives it the `manage_saml` cluster privilege. The use of the `manage_token` cluster privilege will be necessary after the authentication takes place, so that the service account user can maintain access to refresh access tokens on behalf of the authenticated users or to subsequently log them out.

Reviewer: perhaps OOS for this PR, but this page could use a plain language pass. these paras are a little wall-of-texty

> (more correctly, "delegating" the authentication to the SAML Identity Provider).

😬

Author: Yeah, my plan with this big initial refactor was to not touch some of the docs that are just moved to individual docs (like SAML without kibana, Signing and encryption + Mapping SAML attributes to Elasticsearch user properties). But we can apply a basic level of improvements.

However, from all these docs, I think the less popular and important one is this one (saml without kibana), so I wouldn't put much effort there.

Author: https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1587
